At first they will be very small but they grow fast. Watch them come to
the surface to breathe. The tip of the tail is projected above the water
and air is taken in at two small breathing pores or spiracles. Examine
rain barrels for the larger wigglers. What do they live on in the rain
barrel? What do they do when you jar the barrel? Do you find any of the
rounded pupae in the barrel? They are active the same as the wigglers.
If you find pupae, put some in a tumbler of water, cover it with cloth
or a lid and watch for the mosquitoes to appear. After collecting
several mosquitoes examine them for number of wings, legs and markings
and see if all have the slender sucking tube. The males have large
feathery feelers, but no sucking tube.

Write a brief description of the wiggler and the mosquito, their
breeding places and means of destroying them. Make drawings of the
different stages, wiggler, pupa and mosquito.




CHAPTER VI

THE CABBAGE MILLER

    "_And here and yonder a flaky butterfly
    Was doubting in the air._"

                                        --MCDONALD.


With the first approach of spring comes swarms of large green flies
which bask in the March sun on the south sides of buildings. They are
not with us long, however, until we notice flashes of white quickly
moving about from one early weed to another. These are the advance
guards of the cabbage millers or butterflies. All through the cold
winter they remained in the chrysalis stage stuck to the sides of
houses, fence posts and in other protected places, awaiting the first
breath of spring. The first adults to emerge find no cabbage on which
to lay their eggs so they are compelled to use other plants such as
pepper grass.

[Illustration: Egg of cabbage miller much enlarged.]

The eggs are very small and are usually placed on the lower edge of the
leaf. These hatch and the small green worms appear. Throughout the
summer there are a number of broods produced and an enormous amount of
damage is done. Just before frost the last caterpillars search for
protected places where they pass to the pupal or resting stage for the
winter. No cocoon is spun by this caterpillar.

Where measures are not taken to control the cabbage worms they destroy
much of the cabbage crop each season. The white butterflies can be seen
any day during the summer visiting cabbage, mustard, radishes and other
similar plants. By destroying all of the worms and millers in the early
spring one has less trouble later. This can be done by hand picking, or
where the patch is large by spraying with a poison solution to which
soap is added to keep the solution from rolling off in large drops.
Poison can be used until the heads are well formed, but if the first
worms in the spring are destroyed, later spraying is unnecessary though
an occasional handpicking will help.


OBSERVATIONS AND STUDY

[Illustration: Cabbage worm feeding, slightly enlarged.]

Go into the garden and examine the cabbage for small green worms which
vary from one fourth to a little over an inch in length. What is the
nature of their work on the leaf? Where do they feed most, on the outer
or inner leaves? Do they eat the entire leaf? How does the work of the
young worms differ from that of the larger ones? Do they spin silk? Are
they on the top or under side of the leaf? Examine under the dead and
dried leaves at the ground and see if you can find small, hard, gray
objects which have sharp angles and which are tied to the leaf with a
cord of silk. What are these objects? Watch the miller as she visits the
cabbage and see if you can find the small eggs which she lays on the
under side of the leaves. When she visits a cabbage plant she bends her
body up under the outer leaves and stops but a moment, fluttering all
the while as she sticks the small egg to the leaf. It is about the size
of a small crumb of bread. What does the miller feed on? Does she visit
flowers? If so, what flowers?

[Illustration: Pupa or chrysalis of cabbage miller.]


BREEDING WORK

Collect a few of the worms and put them in a glass jar with a piece of
cabbage leaf. Examine them carefully and watch them crawl. How many legs
do they have? Where are they placed on the body? How can they use so
many legs while crawling? How many joints are there to the body? Note
the short fine hair all over the body which gives it the appearance of
green velvet. What color is the head? How does the caterpillar feed?
Write a brief description of the worm. Do not mistake it for the cabbage
span-worm which is also green, but which walks by humping up its back.

[Illustration: Cabbage miller on red clover blossom.]

Keep the cabbage worms in the jar for a few days and watch them
disappear. After they have disappeared, what is left in the jar? These
are the chrysalids or pupae of the insect and later from them will come
the millers. Take one of the pupae in your hand and see if it can move.
If it is in the summer the miller will appear in a week, but if it is in
the late fall it will simply pass the winter in the pupa stage. Watch
the miller escape from the pupal case and describe it. Examine the
miller carefully and describe briefly the number of legs, wings,
segments of body, sucking tube and color markings. Make careful drawings
of the caterpillar, chrysalis and butterfly. What gives the color to the
wings? Rub the wings between your fingers and see if the color comes
off. The wings are covered with very small scales of different colors
which combine to give the beautiful markings. The wings of all
butterflies and moths are covered with scales and hairs in this way. In
this insect we find both chewing and sucking mouth parts. The
caterpillar chews while the parent butterfly has a long tube for sucking
up nectar from flowers and water from puddles in the road.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_Far out at sea--the sun was high,
      While veered the wind and flapped the sail;
    We saw a snow-white butterfly
      Dancing before the fitful gale
          Far out at sea._

    "_The little wanderer, who had lost
      His way, of danger nothing knew;
    Settled a while upon the mast;
      Then fluttered o'er the waters blue
          Far out at sea._

    "_Above, there gleamed the boundless sky;
      Beneath, the boundless ocean sheen;
    Between them danced the butterfly,
      The spirit-life of this vast scene,
          Far out at sea._

    "_The tiny soul that soared away,
      Seeking the clouds on fragile wings,
    Lured by the brighter, purer ray
      Which hope's ecstatic morning brings--
          Far out at sea._

    "_Away he sped, with shimmering glee,
      Scarce seen, now lost, yet onward borne!
    Night comes with wind and rain, and he
      No more will dance before the morn,
          Far out at sea._

    "_He dies, unlike his mates, I ween
      Perhaps not sooner or worse crossed;
    And he hath felt and known and seen
      A larger life and hope, though lost
          Far out at sea._"

                                        --R. H. HORNE.




CHAPTER VII

THE APPLE WORM


[Illustration: Apple worms in core of apple. Usually only one worm
appears in an apple. Note the decaying of the apple.]

This is perhaps the most destructive insect pest attacking the apple.
Every year, that we have a good apple crop, there are thousands of
bushels of wormy apples which are practically worthless. This means an
actual loss of thousands of dollars a year to the apple growers of this
country. For this reason alone each child should come to know the life
history, habits and injury of this pest. It is most destructive to the
apple though the pear comes in for its share.

[Illustration: The codling moth slightly enlarged. (From Slingerland).]

Every country child and many of those of the cities, are familiar with
this worm for they often bite into it while eating apples. The small
worms crawl down in the blossom end of the young developing apple and
from there bore into the pulp and eventually reach the core of the
fruit. They stay in the apple about six weeks when they eat a hole out
to the surface and crawl down to the trunk where loose bark offers a
hiding place. Here they spin their cocoons and change to a small,
brown, plump pupa and after a few days the winged moth emerges. The moth
is very small and is not often found by one not acquainted with it. They
come out during late June and early July when they lay eggs for a second
colony of worms which again enter the fruit and destroy more of it.
These worms of the second brood are usually mature and leave the fruit
about the time apples are picked in the fall in central Missouri. They
escape and soon spin cocoons in which they pass the winter. Early in the
spring these change to pupae and later the moths come out. They appear
about the time apples bloom in the spring and lay the eggs for the first
worms which enter in great numbers at the blossom end.

This in short, is the life story of the pest through the year. Little
can be done to destroy the pest after it gets into the fruit, therefore
remedies must be applied to destroy the worm before it gets into the
fruit. All orchards should be sprayed with a poison in the spring
before the worms appear. Since most of them enter by way of the blossom
end, it is necessary that the poison be put into the blossom end. To do
this spray at once after the blossoms fall, repeat after two weeks and
spray again in July to kill the second brood of worms. The protection of
woodpeckers and sapsuckers will also help as they feed on the worms
under the bark.

[Illustration: Apple blossoms at about the right stage for receiving the
first and most important arsenical spray for the control of the apple
worm.]


OBSERVATIONS AND BREEDING WORK

Go into the orchard and examine for apples with masses of sawdust-like
material projecting from the sides or blossom end. By removing this
brown deposit which is the excrement of the worm, you will find a hole
leading into the apple. Cut open one of these and determine the course
of the tunnel. Where do you find the worm? Do all such apples contain
worms? Where have they gone? How does the feeding of the worms injure
the fruit? Do any of the wormy apples show rot? Are any of the windfalls
in the orchard wormy and if so what proportion?

Remove a worm from one of the apples and examine it. How many legs has
it? What color is it and does it have hair upon its body? Can it crawl
fast? Does it spin silk? Put a number of the large worms in a jar and
examine from day to day and keep records of what happens. Collect a
number in the fall and keep them in a box outdoors during the winter. In
the spring watch them change to the pupa in the cocoon and a little
later the mature insect or codling moth, as it is commonly called, will
emerge. Describe the moth and pin a number of them for your collection.
What time in the spring do the caterpillars change to the pupa and when
do the moths emerge? If you keep the moths in a bottle they will lay
their small circular flat eggs where they can be seen by looking
closely. During the winter examine under the bark of apple trees and in
cracks and crevices about apple pens for the small silk cocoons
containing the worms. Examine in the same places in the spring about
apple blooming time and then in place of the small pink worms you will
find the small brown pupae. Keep these a few days and the moths will
appear.

What proportion of apples in your region are wormy? What are they used
for? Are the trees sprayed just after the blossoms fall to control the
pest? Where spraying is carefully done, are there as many wormy apples?
Why not spray all the orchards properly and have no worms?

Draw and describe the different stages of the apple worm or codling moth
and its injury to fruit.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_O, yet we trust that somehow good
      Will be the final goal of ill,
    To pangs of nature, sins of will,
      Defects of doubt and taints of blood;_

    "_That nothing walks with aimless feet;
      That not one life shall be destroyed,
    Or cast as rubbish to the void,
      When God hath made the pile complete;_

    "_That not a worm is cloven in vain,
      That not a moth with vain desire,
    Is shrivelled in a fruitless fire,
      Or but subserves another's gain._"

                                        --TENNYSON.




CHAPTER VIII

THE TOMATO OR TOBACCO WORM


[Illustration: Egg of Tomato worm moth enlarged.]

This insect is often very destructive to tomatoes and tobacco. Most
country boys and girls know it and fear its ugly looking horn. When full
grown it is four inches long, usually dark green with a number of
slanting white lines along either side. It is so near the color of the
plants that it is difficult to see it.

[Illustration: Young tomato worm.]

During the summer months the worms are common, being most abundant in
August. In the fall the mature worms go into the ground and change from
the worm to a large, oval, brown pupa with a jug-handle-like appendage
on the under side. These are often turned up when the garden is plowed
in the spring. After tomato plants are well started the large greyish
humming-bird-like moths comes from the ground and begin laying eggs. The
moth expands from four to six inches and is often seen at dusk visiting
the blossoms of "jimson weed" and other large tube flowers. They are
also found around lights at night.

Where they are troublesome the plants should either be sprayed with a
poison when the injury is first noticed or else the worms should be
picked off and destroyed. There is a small parasitic wasp which is very
helpful in destroying this caterpillar. They live inside the worm and
when mature bore out through the skin on the sides and back where they
spin small white egg-like cocoons from which later the small wasps
emerge. Often a hundred or more may come out of one worm.


STUDY AND OBSERVATION

Observe the worms where they are at work on tomatoes. Disturb them and
hear them grind their jaws together. Do they eat the foliage rapidly?
Dust a little Paris green on the foliage where a worm is eating and see
what happens in half an hour. Collect a number of the worms in a glass
fruit can and give them tomato leaves to eat and watch them grow. How
many segments are there to the body? How many of the segments have
small black spots on either side? These are holes through which the worm
breathes. Is the horn at the end of the body stiff enough to stick into
your hand? This is thought to be a sting but it is only an ornament and
is entirely harmless. When full grown they will burrow into the sand in
the jar and change to the pupa.

[Illustration: Full-fed tomato worm slightly reduced.]

[Illustration: Chrysalis or pupa of tomato worm. Note the
jug-handle-like sheaths enclosing the proboscis.]

Examine the brown pupa carefully and see if it can move. What is the
peculiar structure on the under side of the body? The moth which comes
from this in the spring is very large. It is covered with white and
black scales and hairs which give it a mottled appearance. Examine on
the under side of the head for a peculiar structure like a watch spring.
This is the sucking tube used in drawing up nectar from deep tubular
blossoms. When the moths are sipping nectar from "jimson weed" blossoms
they can be killed by pouring a little poison down into the blossoms.

[Illustration: Tomato worm moth natural size.]




CHAPTER IX

THE FIREFLY


This insect is of little economic importance to us at present but its
peculiar habit of producing light makes it a very striking form and one
which deserves study. The firefly is a beetle, and begins to make its
appearance the latter part of June when the darkest nights may be one
solid glow of fire. They live largely in damp places and bottoms at
night are specked with their tiny flashes of light. The larval or grub
stage is passed on the ground beneath grass, weeds and rubbish where
they often prey upon other insects. In some cases the grubs may be able
to produce light though as a rule the luminous grub-like creature or
glow-worm is a wingless adult firefly.


OBSERVATIONS AND STUDIES

Watch for the first appearance of the fireflies in the evening and see
where they come from. Do they all appear at once or only a few at first?
Do they fly fast? How often is the light produced? Will they produce the
light while on the ground? When they fly do they stay near the ground or
high in the air? Do they light in trees?

[Illustration: Firefly beetles on sour-dock leaf.]

Catch one of the fireflies in your hat and examine it carefully. How
large is it? Describe briefly its size, shape and color. Are its wing
covers hard like other beetles? Where is the light produced? What color
is the light? Is it bright? Hold the firefly on the opposite side of a
sheet of paper and see if the light will show through. Try the same with
your hat, coat sleeve and other objects. This light is extremely
penetrating and unlike the light of a lamp is produced with the
generation of very little heat. Will it continue to flash while you hold
it? Are the segments from which the light comes the same color as the
other segments of the body? Crush the tip of the body between your
thumb and finger and see if the light continues to appear. How long does
it last? Collect a number of the fireflies and put them in a bottle and
see if the light is strong enough to enable you to read.

The firefly has proven to us that our methods of producing light are
extremely wasteful since much of the energy is lost in heat and it is
possible that through the lesson of the firefly we may some day be able
to produce better light at less expense.

[Illustration: Lower surface of firefly beetle enlarged to show the
light producing segments of the abdomen.]




CHAPTER X

THE WHITE GRUB OR JUNE-BUG


[Illustration: White grub feeding on roots of corn plant, enlarged.]

This insect is more familiar to country children in the grub stage.
Every one who has followed a plow in rich sod land has seen these fat,
white coiled grubs roll down into the furrow when the plow turns them
up. They are in the ground feeding on the roots of plants. Often all the
roots of grass in lawns and meadows are eaten off and the sod dies and
can be rolled up like strips of carpet. This insect breeds largely in
sod and when this is plowed under and other crops are planted the grubs
may injure them severely. Corn, wheat, oats and truck crops are
severely injured. In some cases the grubs may feed for three years
before they change to the pupa and later to the adult beetle. To control
this pest, plow in the fall and rotate crops, so that sod will not
remain on the same land too long.

[Illustration: June beetle showing stages of development. The larva or
grub worm is feeding on roots under ground; the pupa and adult are shown
above ground.]

The beetles come from the ground or may be plowed out in May and June
and are commonly spoken of as May-beetles or June-bugs. They are usually
of a yellowish-brown color and are often troublesome coming into the
house at night where they buzz about the light, bumping into everything
until they finally drop heavily to the floor. All country boys and girls
know these beetles.


OBSERVATIONS AND STUDIES

Collect a number of the grubs from the ground and examine them for legs,
eyes and mouth. How many legs have they? Can you find eyes? What use
would they have for eyes while in the ground? Do they bite? Place them
on the table and see how they move. What color are they? Do you find
spines or hair on their bodies? Pull up a little grass by the roots and
put it in a jelly tumbler with soil and put some of the grubs in with
it. Water it so as to keep it growing and follow the development of the
grubs.

Collect some of the beetles and put them in a bottle and watch them
crawl about. Where are their wings? How can they get them out when they
want to fly? How many legs have they? Examine the tip of the feet for
hooks. What are these used for? Can they chew leaves? Where are their
eyes? Do you find feelers and if so where?

Write a short description of the grub and the beetle and make careful
drawings of them.




CHAPTER XI

THE COLORADO POTATO BEETLE


This is one of the worst pests of the potato. As the name would imply it
came originally from Colorado but is common now all over the country.
The full grown insect is short and thick with a hard shell, striped with
yellow and black. The grubs, on the other hand, are soft and red or
orange with black spots. Both the grubs and the beetles feed on potatoes
and often completely strip them of their leaves. Since they feed on
foliage they can be very quickly destroyed by dusting or spraying the
plants with a poison such as Paris green or arsenate of lead. The
patches of yellow or reddish eggs are found mostly on the under side of
the potato leaves. When the fat grubs are full-fed they go into the
ground and change to pupae and later to the striped beetles. This pest
should not be mistaken for the so-called old-fashioned potato beetles
which are long and slender and either bluish grey in color or striped
with yellow and black. These are blister beetles and are entirely
different.


OBSERVATIONS AND STUDIES

Watch for the first appearance of the adult beetles in the spring when
the potatoes are just beginning to come up. They pass the winter under
ground and in the spring come out ready to lay eggs on the young
potatoes. Collect and examine the adults. How many stripes have they?
Collect packets of eggs and count them. How many eggs in most packets?
How are they attached to the leaf? How large are the grubs when they
hatch from the egg? Examine the grubs where they are feeding on
potatoes. Do they eat holes through the leaf, or do they eat away the
entire leaf? How fast do they grow? Collect a few in a glass tumbler.
Feed them and watch them grow. What do they do when you touch them? What
does the hard backed beetle do when it is touched? Collect some of the
large grubs with tightly stuffed bodies and put them in a jar with dirt
or sand and see where they go. After a week dig them out and see what
they look like.

[Illustration: The Colorado potato beetle showing stages of development
and work on a potato plant. Note the small patch of eggs and different
sized grub on the plant and the grub, pupa and adult at side.]

Write a short description of the eggs, grubs and beetle, its work and
means of killing it when it is feeding on potatoes. Make careful
drawings of a cluster of eggs, the grub and the beetle.




CHAPTER XII

THE LADY-BEETLE

    "_Hurt no living thing:
    Ladybird, nor butterfly,
    Nor moth with dusty wing,
    Nor cricket chirping cheerily,
    Nor grasshopper so light of leap,
    Nor dancing gnat, nor beetle fat,
    Nor harmless worms that creep._"

                                        --CHRISTINA ROSSETTI.


The lady-beetles comprise one family of small beetles, which is famous
for the number of beneficial forms it includes. With but two exceptions
the American forms feed upon other insects, in most cases pests such as
plant-lice and scale insects. From the time they hatch from the egg
until they pupate and again after the beetle stage is reached they are
regular tigers after plant-lice. They catch and hold their prey between
the front feet while they devour it bodily. The larva of the lady-beetle
has an astonishing capacity for in one day it will eat several times its
own weight of plant-lice. Farmers and fruit growers could hardly get
along without the help of these small beetles and yet unfortunately
thousands are often destroyed by those who do not know of their
beneficial work.

[Illustration: The spotted lady-beetle; a, larva; b, pupa; c, adult;
enlarged. (After Chittenden, U. S. Dept. Agri.)]

The lady-beetles, or lady-birds as they are often called, are fairly
uniform in shape and color. They are oval or round in outline with the
back rounded or elevated and the underside flat. In color they are
usually either orange or yellow, checkered or blotched with black or
black with yellow or bright orange markings. They closely resemble small
tortoises. Unfortunately several plant feeding beetles are similar in
shape and color which casts reflections on the lady-beetles.

[Illustration: The convergent lady-beetle; a, adult; b, pupa; c, larva;
all enlarged. (After Chittenden, U. S. Dept. Agri.)]

The grub of the lady-beetle is usually black or dull colored with red or
yellow markings which make it very conspicuous. It runs about over
foliage and is broad in front and tapers to a point behind. When the
grub is full fed it attaches the top of its body to a leaf, twig or
other object and pupates. In the pupal stage it is often protected with
spines and is able to lift the front end of the body up and down when
disturbed, producing a light tapping sound.

The lady-beetle usually hides in rubbish about the base of trees or in
some cases even enter homes for the winter months, coming out with the
spring to deposit small masses of oval yellow or orange eggs on plants
infested with lice. They breed rapidly and with the help of parasites
and other beneficial insects usually control the plant-lice pests.


OBSERVATIONS AND STUDIES

Examine about fruit trees, shade trees, truck crops and in wheat fields
for the brightly marked beetles. Watch them move about the plant in
search of food. Can they fly? Do you find them eating the leaves? Do you
find any green lice near them? See if they feed on these lice. Examine
also for the soft bodied, tiger-like grubs. Do they eat the lice? Do
they travel fast? Have they wings? See if you can find any of the pupae
attached to limbs or twigs and if so, tickle them with a straw or a
pencil and see them "bow." Keep a record of the different trees and
plants on which you find lady-beetles.

Collect several of the beetles and the grubs and keep them in a bottle
or jelly glass. Leave them without food for a day and then give them
some green plant-lice and watch them devour the lice. How many lice can
one eat in a day? How do they go about devouring a louse? Do they simply
suck out the blood, or is the louse completely devoured? Supposing that
for each apple tree in Missouri there are one hundred lady-beetles and
that each beetle devours fifteen lice in a day, does it not seem worth
while protecting them and encouraging such work? A little time spent in
acquainting one's self with the good work of such forms as these will
help greatly in the fight on our insect foes. Make drawings of and
describe briefly the different stages of the lady-beetles.




CHAPTER XIII

THE DRAGON-FLY


What child is there that is not familiar with the insect commonly known
as the dragon-fly, snake doctor or snake feeder? Every lover of the
stream or pond has seen these miniature aeroplanes darting now here, now
there but ever retracing their airy flight along the water's edge or
dipping in a sudden nose dive to skim its very surface. At times it is
seen to rest lazily, wings out-stretched, perched on some projecting
reed or other object. But when approached how suddenly it "takes off"
and is out of reach. The dragon-fly is an almost perfect model of the
modern monoplane. Its two long wings on either side are the planes, its
head the nose, its thorax the fuselage and its long projecting abdomen
the tail or rudder. On wing the dragon-fly is one of the swiftest and
most powerful insects. The dragon-flies are found all over the world
being most abundant in the warmer regions where rainfall and bodies of
water are abundant. For breeding they require water, their immature
stages living under water feeding on aquatic animal life. Our present
order of dragon-flies is the remains of an ancient race of insects of
immense size. From fossil remains we learn that ancient dragon-flies
had a wing expanse of three feet.

[Illustration: Cast off skin of dragon-fly nymph, showing shape and
position taken on a twig when the adult winged form emerged from the
last nymph stage.]

The dragon-fly is a beneficial insect thruout life. The young feed on
mosquito wigglers and similar life in ponds and streams while the adults
dart here and there over ponds, fields or lawn catching mosquitoes and
other winged insects. Many look upon the dragon-fly as a dangerous
stinging insect but it is entirely harmless and can be handled without
the least danger. They vary greatly in size and appearance. The
so-called damsel-flies form a group of dragon-flies or Odonata which
rest with the wings in a vertical position and the young aquatic stages
are more slender. In color markings dragon-flies include all hues of the
rainbow tho as a rule they do not have such extravagant colors as the
butterflies.

[Illustration: One of our common dragon-flies found about ponds and
streams.]


OBSERVATIONS AND FIELD STUDIES

Go into the fields and study and collect the different kinds of
dragon-flies and their young stages from the bottoms of ponds. How
swiftly can they fly? Do they fly high in the air as well as near the
water or surface of the earth? Can you see them catch other insects? Do
birds catch them and eat them? Take a position along the edge of a pond
and as they come flying by swing swiftly with your net and catch one.
Examine it carefully. Note the strength of the long, slender wings with
their lace-like network of veins. Measure the distance across the back
from tip to tip of wings. Compare this with the length from tip of head
to the tip of the abdomen. Examine the head with its large compound eyes
and the chewing mouth parts. Note the strong thorax which is filled with
muscles to operate the wings in flight. How many segments are there to
the abdomen?

With the hands or with a bucket dip up a quantity of mud and trash from
the bottom of a pond and pile it on the bank. As the water soaks away
watch for signs of life in the mass. If you find a few small creatures,
say half an inch long with large head and eyes, broad body and with six
rather long legs they are probably the nymph stages of dragon-flies.
Wash the mud off of them so that you can examine them carefully. With a
straw probe in the mouth and you will find that the lower lip is a long
elbowed structure which can be suddenly thrown out in front of it and
with a pair of pincher-like prongs at the tip it can catch and hold its
prey. Some forms keep their bodies covered with mud so that they can
slowly creep up close to their prey.

Collect several nymphs and keep them in a jar of water and study their
movements and feeding habits. Disturb one with a pencil or straw and see
how it darts forward. It has a water chamber in the large intestines,
including also the respiratory tracheal gills, from which the water can
be suddenly squirted which throws the insect forward. The escaping
stream of water forces the insect forward on the same principle as the
rotating lawn sprinkler. If you collect some almost mature nymphs and
keep them for a time in a vessel of water you may see them crawl out of
the water, shed their skin and change to winged adults. Collect a few
adults of different species for pinning in your permanent collection.




CHAPTER XIV

THE SQUASH BUG


This common blackish or earth-colored bug is usually called the squash
stink-bug. It has a very disagreeable odor which gives it this name.
When disturbed it throws off from scent glands a small quantity of an
oily substance which produces this odor. This is a protection to it for
few birds or animals care to feed on it. Most species of sap or blood
sucking true bugs have a similar protecting odor.

The squash bug feeds largely on squash and pumpkins. It has a slender
beak with needle-like mouth parts which are stuck into the plant for
extracting the sap. It feeds only on plant sap. When it can not get
squash or pumpkins it will feed on watermelons, muskmelons and related
crops. It is very destructive to these crops. It not only extracts sap
thus weakening the plant but it also seems to poison the plant while
feeding. In this way its bite injures the plant something like the
effects of the bed-bug's bite on our flesh. It feeds first on the leaves
and vines often killing them in a few days. Later it may cluster and
feed on the unripe squashes or pumpkins in such numbers as to completely
cover them. Every country boy or girl has seen these stinking bugs on
pumpkins in the corn field, at corn cutting time in the fall.

[Illustration: Pumpkin in field covered with adults and nymphs of squash
stink-bug.]

The squash bug lives thru the winter as the matured winged insect. It
flies from its food plant to winter quarters late in the fall. For
winter protection it may enter buildings, hide under shingles on roofs,
crawl into piles of lumber, under bark of dead trees or stumps or hide
under any similar protection. When its chosen food crops begin to come
up in the spring it leaves its winter home and flies in search of food.
After feeding for a time the female lays patches of oval, flattened,
gold-colored eggs set on edge. When first deposited the eggs have a
pale color but in a short time the golden color appears. In some cases
only three or four eggs may be found in one patch while again there may
be twenty or thirty of them. They are so brightly colored that they can
easily be seen and most boys and girls have seen them on the leaves of
squashes or pumpkins.

[Illustration: Cluster of golden-brown eggs of squash stink-bug showing
two recently hatched nymphs.]

In a few days after they are laid they hatch and out of each crawls a
small, long-legged blackish or greenish young bug called the nymph.
These little fellows usually stay in a crowd hiding on the under side of
a leaf. After feeding for a time their leaf begins to turn yellow and
soon dies. Then they move to a new leaf. As they feed they grow rapidly
and after shedding their skins they change to the second nymph stage.
This shedding of their skins or molting occurs five times before they
mature. Of course each time before the old skin or suit of clothes is
discarded a new one is developed beneath. The females may continue to
deposit eggs for later clusters of young. They become most abundant on
the crop late in the fall. Just before cold weather sets in the adults
again seek winter shelter.

This is a very difficult insect to control. Since it feeds on liquid sap
only it is impossible to kill it by spraying the crop with a poison such
as arsenate of lead. It can not chew and swallow such poison. The young
can be killed fairly well with a spray or dust containing nicotine but
such treatments are not effective against the adults or nearly mature
nymphs. A better method is to destroy all the bugs possible in the fall
before they go to the winter protection and then watch for and destroy
the adults and the eggs masses in the spring when they appear on the
young crop. If the first adults and the eggs and newly hatched nymphs
are destroyed the crop can be protected against the destructive work
later.


OBSERVATIONS AND FIELD STUDIES

Plant a few squash hills in the garden in the spring and also plant a
few seeds in rich dirt in discarded tin cans or flower pots. As the
spring advances and the squashes start to vine watch for squash bugs on
them. Examine in piles of lumber, stove wood and under bark for some of
the bugs before they come to the squash hills. If any are found put them
on the squash plants in flower pots and cover them with a pint mason
fruit jar. Watch for eggs to appear on the plants and also examine for
eggs on the squashes in the garden. When eggs appear examine them
carefully, measure them and write a brief description of them. Try to
mash them between your fingers. When they hatch carefully study the
young nymph and describe it. Can you see the slender beak which incloses
the mouth parts? How many joints are there to the antennae? As the nymph
grows watch it shed its skin. How does it do it? Where does its skin
first crack? Save the cast skin and try to follow the nymph thru all
the nymph stages to the adult. Collect a bottle of the nymphs of varying
sizes from the garden. Examine them and describe the different stages.
Can you see the wings forming on the backs of the older nymphs? How many
small wing pads are there? Examine the adult closely and write a careful
description of it. Can you find where the secretion that causes the odor
is produced? How long will the odor stay on your hands? Can you wash it
off? Spread the wings of the adult and make a careful drawing of one
front and one hind wing showing accurately the wing veins. In the garden
try to protect all the hills of squash from the bugs except one or two
used for your studies. Write a brief description of your methods of
control.

[Illustration: Squash stink-bug adult and nymph extracting sap from
squash.]




CHAPTER XV

THE PLANT-LOUSE


For this chapter any common species of plant-louse may be used. If the
study is made in the spring the louse on rose, apple, clover, wheat or
any other crop may be used. If the study is made in the fall the species
on turnips, corn or other plant or crop may be selected. The different
species vary greatly but for these studies any available species will be
satisfactory.

The plant-louse or aphis is a sap-sucking insect which feeds and
multiplies rapidly often seriously injuring crops. The loss of sap
together with the poisoning effect of the bite causes the weakening of
the plant or leaf with its ultimate death if feeding continues. The
greatest damage is usually done during cold springs or during a cool
rainy period. This prevents the enemies of the louse from increasing and
attacking it while the weather may not be too severe to prevent the
louse from working. Under favorable climatic conditions the natural
enemies of the louse as a rule are able to hold it in check. The
principal enemies of the louse are certain small insect feeding birds,
lady-beetles, syrphid-flies, lace-wings and tiny wasp parasites. The
beneficial work of the lady-beetles is discussed in an earlier chapter.
The birds and lady-beetles devour them bodily, the larvæ of the
lace-wings and syrphid-flies extract their blood while the wasps live as
internal parasites.

In the latitude of Missouri the plant-lice as a rule live thru the
winter in the form of a fertile egg attached to the twigs of trees and
shrubs. The winter egg is produced by a true female plant-louse. As a
rule there is only one generation of true males and females produced
each year. This brood develops late in the fall to produce the
fertilized winter eggs. In the spring these eggs hatch and the tiny
nymphs begin to extract sap. On maturing they begin to give birth to
young lice. Throughout the summer this method of reproduction continues.
These summer forms are known as the stem mothers or agamic females.
These are not true females for they produce living young in place of
eggs and during the summer no male lice are produced at all. This is
nature's way of increasing the race of plant-lice rapidly. Late in the
fall again a brood of true males and females is produced. During the
summer the plant-lice increase more rapidly than any other type of
insect.

[Illustration: Black winter eggs of Aphis showing how they are deposited
in masses on twigs of apple. (After U. S. Dept. Agri.)]

Plant-lice vary in size, color and general appearance. Many are green
while some are red or black or covered with a cottony secretion.


OBSERVATIONS AND FIELD STUDIES

Plant some melon, radish or other seeds in fertile soil in pots for use
in this study. When lice appear on crops in the garden or field, collect
a leaf with a few on it and carefully transfer them to the leaves on
your potted plants. Watch the lice feed and increase from day to day. A
reading lens or a magnifying glass will be helpful as plant-lice are
very small. How do they move about? Can you count their legs? How many
have they? Can you see their eyes and feelers? When feeding observe how
the beak is pressed against the leaf. Disturb one while it is feeding
and see it attempt to loosen its mouth parts.

[Illustration: Common apple aphis showing a winged and wingless agamic
summer forms at a and c, one with wing pads formed at b, and a recently
born young at d. (After U. S. Dept. Agri.)]

In the garden examine and see if you can find lady-beetles or other
parasites attacking the lice. Collect some of the enemies of the lice
for your collection. Make a gallon of tobacco tea by soaking one pound
of tobacco stems or waste tobacco in one gallon of water for a day or
use one ounce of forty per cent nicotine sulphate in three gallons of
soap suds and spray or sprinkle infested bushes or vegetables with it.
In an hour examine and see what effect it has had on the plant-lice.
Nicotine is the most effective chemical for killing plant-lice. Do any
of the lice develop wings? If so, how many? Wings develop on some of the
lice at times when a plant or crop becomes too heavily infested by them.
This enables some of the lice to spread to new food plants before old
plants are completely destroyed and the colony of lice starved.

[Illustration: Wooly apple aphis, showing how they cluster in masses on
limbs and secrete the white, wooly protection over their bodies.]

Make a careful enlarged drawing of a winged plant-louse and a wingless
one showing legs, feelers, beak, honey dew tubes on back and body
segmentation. If ants are seen to attend the lice observe them carefully
and describe their work. The ants feed on a sweet honey dew excretion
discharged by the lice.




CHAPTER XVI

THE HONEY BEE

    "_Simple and sweet is their food; they eat no flesh of the living._"

                                        --VON KUEBEL.


One can hardly believe that this small, ever busy creature each year
gathers many million dollars worth of products for man in this country
alone to say nothing of its inestimable value on the farm and especially
in the orchard, where it assists in carrying pollen from blossom to
blossom. It is of far greater value to man as a carrier of pollen than
it is as a honey gatherer and yet under especially favorable conditions
in one year a strong colony may produce between twenty-five and thirty
dollars worth of honey.

[Illustration: Worker, queen and drone honey bees; all about natural
size. (After Phillips, U. S. Dept. of Agri.)]

The general habits of the bee are fairly well known by all. They live in
colonies consisting largely of workers, one female or queen and males or
drones. Whenever the number of workers becomes sufficiently large to
warrant a division of the colony, a young queen is reared by the workers
and just before she matures, the old queen leaves with about half of the
workers to establish a new colony. This division of the colony is called
swarming. If a hive, box or other acceptable home is not provided soon
after the swarm comes out and clusters, it may fly to the woods and
establishes itself in a hollow tree where the regular work of honey
gathering is continued. This accounts for so many bee-trees in the
woods. The bee has been handled by man for ages, but it readily becomes
wild when allowed to escape to the woods.

[Illustration: Stages of development of honey bee; a, egg; b, young
grub; c, full-fed grub; d, pupa; all enlarged. (After Phillips, U. S.
Dept. Agri.)]

The bee colony offers one of the best examples to show what can be
accomplished by united effort where harmony prevails. Certain of the
workers gather honey, others are nurses for the queen and young brood in
the hive, others guard the hive and repel intruders, and others care for
the hive by mending breaks and providing new comb as it is needed. Each
knows its work and goes about it without interfering with the work of
others. It is one huge assemblage of individuals under one roof where
harmony and industry prevail.

Throughout the long, hot summer days the workers are busy from daylight
until dark gathering nectar, while at night they force currents of air
thru the hive to evaporate the excess water from the nectar. When
flowers are not available near the hive they simply fly until they find
them, be it one, two or more miles. As long as they are able to gather
honey they continue to do so and when they give out they drop in the
field and are forgotten, others rushing to take their place. Often when
winter is approaching and the store of honey is low the less vigorous
ones are cast out from the hive and left to die. If man could learn a
few of the lessons which the bee teaches, he would be a better, a more
useful and a wiser addition to society.


OBSERVATIONS AND STUDIES

[Illustration: Two colonies of bees poorly cared for. Note box hives,
crowding, lack of shade, and high weeds. It is a crime to treat bees
this way.]

Go into the fields and study the work of the bee. Follow it from flower
to flower. See if it visits different kinds of flowers or if it gathers
its whole load of honey from one kind. Make a list of all the blossoms
you find bees visiting. Does the bee move slowly from flower to flower?
Can you see it thrust its tongue into the flower? How long does it stay
on one blossom? Does it visit red clover? Pull a red clover blossom
apart and compare the depth of the blossom with the length of the honey
bee's tongue, and determine the reason why it does not visit red
clover. The bumble-bee has a much longer tongue so it can get the nectar
from red clover blossoms. Without the bumble-bee clover seed could not
be successfully grown. Can you see small balls of yellow pollen on the
hind legs of the bee? The pollen is collected from blossoms and is
pasted on to the outside of the hind legs in the pollen basket. When the
bee returns to the hive, it stores the small balls of pollen in the
cells of the comb for use later in the preparation of bee-bread. When
the bee is disturbed in the field does it fly away or will it sting?
When it stings does it always lose its sting? What makes the sting of
the bee poisonous? Examine the wings of bees in the field and note how
they are torn from continued work of gathering honey. The older ones
often lose so much of their wings, that they can no longer carry loads
of honey. Where is the honey carried and how is it placed in the honey
cells in the hive?

[Illustration: A strong colony of bees properly housed and shaded. This
colony in a very unfavorable season stored about 50 pounds of surplus
honey.]

Go now to a hive and study the bees as they go and come. Do those
returning fly as fast as those which leave? Why not? When they return do
they come direct to the mouth of the hive? Do those which leave fly
direct from the hive or circle about first? Can you detect guards which
move about at the entrance of the hive? What happens when a fly or other
insect alights near the opening? Will the bees sting when you disturb
them about the hive? If possible study the colony inside the hive. To do
this you will need smoke to subdue the guards and a veil to protect the
face. Can you find the queen? Is she larger than the workers? Examine
for honey-comb, bee-bread, worker brood, queen cells and drone cells. If
possible study the actions of a colony while swarming.

Write a brief report of what you can learn of the life, work and habits
of the honey bee.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "_Happy insect, what can be
      In happiness compared to thee?
    Fed with nourishment divine,
      The dewy morning's gentle wine!_

    "_Nature waits upon thee still,
      And thy verdant cup does fill;
    'Tis filled wherever thou doest tread
      Nature's self thy Ganymede._

    "_Thou doest drink and dance and sing,
      Happier than the happiest king!
    All the fields which thou doest see,
      All the plants belong to thee,
    All the summer hours produce,
      Fertile made with early juice,
    Man for thee does sow and plough,
      Farmer he, and landlord thou._"

                                        --From THE GREEK OF ANACREON.




CHAPTER XVII

THE ANT


The ants are closely related to the bees and are similar to them in many